skills/new-python-project/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: new-python-project
description: "Initialize new Python apps, packages, or libraries using UV with Python >=3.14. Use when creating a package (`uv init --package`), app (`uv init <name>`), or library (`uv init --lib`). Ensures project structure, `pyproject.toml` template, ruff + pytest via `uvx`, and git repo creation in /Users/wgu/Documents/PyCharm Projects."
---

# New Python Project (UV) 🚀

## Overview

This skill initializes a new Python *app*, *package*, or *library* using UV (https://docs.astral.sh/uv/). Use this skill when you want a consistent, opinionated starter that:

- Uses Python >=3.14 (written as `requires-python = ">=3.14"`) ✅
- Always runs all commands through `uv` / `uvx` (no direct `pip`/`python`/`ruff`/`pytest` calls) 🔧
- Enforces `ruff` for linting/formatting and `pytest` for tests via `uvx` 💡
- Creates a Git repository rooted at `/Users/wgu/Documents/PyCharm Projects/<project-name>` (initial commit included) ✅

## When to use this skill

- Creating a new package: `uv init --package <name>`
- Creating a new app: `uv init <name>`
- Creating a new library (typed distribution): `uv init --lib <name>`

The helper script `scripts/init_project.py` in this skill automates the `uv` call, patches `pyproject.toml` to the project's canonical template, creates `.python-version`, initializes Git, and creates `py.typed` for libraries.

## Project Templates

App/Package structure (package example):

```
example-pkg
├── .python-version
├── README.md
├── pyproject.toml
└── src
│   └── example_pkg
│       └── py.typed
│       └── __init__.py
├── tests
```

Library structure (typed library example):

```
example-lib
├── .python-version
├── README.md
├── pyproject.toml
└── src
│   └── example_lib
│       └── py.typed
│       └── __init__.py
├── tests
```

## Canonical pyproject.toml (template)

Replace `example-pkg` with your project name and `example_pkg` with the importable package name (hyphens -> underscores):

```
[project]
name = "example-pkg"
version = "0.1.0"
description = "Add your description here"
readme = "README.md"
authors = [
    { name = "Jared Howland", email = "example-pkg@jaredhowland.com" }
]
requires-python = ">=3.14"
dependencies = []

[project.scripts]
example-pkg = "example_pkg:main"

[build-system]
requires = ["uv_build>=0.9.30,<0.10.0"]
build-backend = "uv_build"
```

Notes:
- All projects should include a `py.typed` file inside the package directory so type checkers treat them as typed.
- `requires-python` must be `">=3.14"` per organizational standard.

## Commands (always via UV)

- Initialize (example package):

  uv init --package example-pkg

- Lint / format with `ruff` via UV: ⚠️ run these through `uvx`

  `uvx ruff format .``
  `uvx ruff check --fix .``

- Run type checkers with `mypy` via UV:

  `uvx mypy .``

- Run tests (pytest) via UV:

  `uvx pytest -q`

## Helper script: `scripts/init_project.py`

This skill includes `scripts/init_project.py`, a small CLI wrapper that:

- Runs `uv init` with the right flags
- Writes `.python-version` (default `3.14`)
- Overwrites `pyproject.toml` with the canonical template shown above
- Creates `py.typed` for `--lib` projects
- Initializes a Git repository in `/Users/wgu/Documents/PyCharm Projects/<name>` and makes an initial commit

Usage examples:

- Create a package:
  `python scripts/init_project.py --type package --name example-pkg --path /Users/wgu/Documents/PyCharm Projects`

- Create a library:
  `python scripts/init_project.py --type lib --name example-lib`

- Create an app:
  `python scripts/init_project.py --type app --name example-app`

## Safety & Conventions

- All files created by this skill are small, deterministic, and intended as a starting point.
- Use `uvx ruff format .` and `uvx ruff check --fix .` immediately after initialization to ensure consistent formatting.
- Do not embed long boilerplate or copyrighted content. Keep README short and editable.

## Troubleshooting

- If `uv` is not installed, the helper script will exit with a clear message instructing to install `uv` first.
- If the target path exists and is non-empty, the script will refuse to overwrite unless the `--force` flag is used (use cautiously).

## Implementation notes for maintainers

- The script intentionally writes a minimal canonical `pyproject.toml` and will replace whatever `uv init` produced. This enforces the organization's project template (Python version, uv_build backend, empty deps, and a single default script entry).
- Tests for this skill should be included.

---

*Skill created to standardize new Python project creation using UV and to reduce manual setup steps.*

Commit message:

Make init_project safer and add tests
Clarify SKILL usage and harden project initialization.

- SKILL.md: clarify that the skill creates either a package or library (defaults to package) and remove the app example.
- scripts/init_project.py:
  - Add a simple TEST_TEMPLATE and create tests/test_smoke.py.
  - Replace strict overwrite behavior with safe_write_text that skips existing files (and non-file paths) unless force=True, and add a docstring.
  - Ensure project directory exists before writing files.
  - Write .python-version and py.typed only when missing or when force is specified; always create py.typed for typed packages.
  - Accept a force flag for init_with_uv and pass --force to `uv init` when requested.
  - Run `uv init` first and then create canonical files so the script is idempotent and robust when rerun or when UV already created some files.

These changes improve safety and make the init flow resilient to pre-existing files or partial runs.

skills/new-python-project/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: new-python-project
description: "Initialize new Python apps, packages, or libraries using UV with Python >=3.14. Use when creating a package (`uv init --package`), app (`uv init <name>`), or library (`uv init --lib`). Ensures project structure, `pyproject.toml` template, ruff + pytest via `uvx`, and git repo creation in /Users/wgu/Documents/PyCharm Projects."
---

# New Python Project (UV) 🚀

## Overview

This skill initializes a new Python project as either a *package* or *library* using UV (https://docs.astral.sh/uv/). If not specified, make it a package. Use this skill when you want a consistent, opinionated starter that:

- Uses Python >=3.14 (written as `requires-python = ">=3.14"`) ✅
- Always runs all commands through `uv` / `uvx` (no direct `pip`/`python`/`ruff`/`pytest` calls) 🔧
- Enforces `ruff` for linting/formatting and `pytest` for tests via `uvx` 💡
- Creates a Git repository rooted at `/Users/wgu/Documents/PyCharm Projects/<project-name>` (initial commit included) ✅

## When to use this skill

- Creating a new package: `uv init --package <name>`
- Creating a new app: `uv init <name>`
- Creating a new library (typed distribution): `uv init --lib <name>`

The helper script `scripts/init_project.py` in this skill automates the `uv` call, patches `pyproject.toml` to the project's canonical template, creates `.python-version`, initializes Git, and creates `py.typed` for libraries.

## Project Templates

App/Package structure (package example):

```
example-pkg
├── .python-version
├── README.md
├── pyproject.toml
└── src
│   └── example_pkg
│       └── py.typed
│       └── __init__.py
├── tests
```

Library structure (typed library example):

```
example-lib
├── .python-version
├── README.md
├── pyproject.toml
└── src
│   └── example_lib
│       └── py.typed
│       └── __init__.py
├── tests
```

## Canonical pyproject.toml (template)

Replace `example-pkg` with your project name and `example_pkg` with the importable package name (hyphens -> underscores):

```
[project]
name = "example-pkg"
version = "0.1.0"
description = "Add your description here"
readme = "README.md"
authors = [
    { name = "Jared Howland", email = "example-pkg@jaredhowland.com" }
]
requires-python = ">=3.14"
dependencies = []

[project.scripts]
example-pkg = "example_pkg:main"

[build-system]
requires = ["uv_build>=0.9.30,<0.10.0"]
build-backend = "uv_build"
```

Notes:
- All projects should include a `py.typed` file inside the package directory so type checkers treat them as typed.
- `requires-python` must be `">=3.14"` per organizational standard.

## Commands (always via UV)

- Initialize (example package):

  uv init --package example-pkg

- Lint / format with `ruff` via UV: ⚠️ run these through `uvx`

  `uvx ruff format .``
  `uvx ruff check --fix .``

- Run type checkers with `mypy` via UV:

  `uvx mypy .``

- Run tests (pytest) via UV:

  `uvx pytest -q`

## Helper script: `scripts/init_project.py`

This skill includes `scripts/init_project.py`, a small CLI wrapper that:

- Runs `uv init` with the right flags
- Writes `.python-version` (default `3.14`)
- Overwrites `pyproject.toml` with the canonical template shown above
- Creates `py.typed` for `--lib` projects
- Initializes a Git repository in `/Users/wgu/Documents/PyCharm Projects/<name>` and makes an initial commit

Usage examples:

- Create a package:
  `python scripts/init_project.py --type package --name example-pkg --path /Users/wgu/Documents/PyCharm Projects`

- Create a library:
  `python scripts/init_project.py --type lib --name example-lib`

## Safety & Conventions

- All files created by this skill are small, deterministic, and intended as a starting point.
- Use `uvx ruff format .` and `uvx ruff check --fix .` immediately after initialization to ensure consistent formatting.
- Do not embed long boilerplate or copyrighted content. Keep README short and editable.

## Troubleshooting

- If `uv` is not installed, the helper script will exit with a clear message instructing to install `uv` first.
- If the target path exists and is non-empty, the script will refuse to overwrite unless the `--force` flag is used (use cautiously).

## Implementation notes for maintainers

- The script intentionally writes a minimal canonical `pyproject.toml` and will replace whatever `uv init` produced. This enforces the organization's project template (Python version, uv_build backend, empty deps, and a single default script entry).
- Tests for this skill should be included.

---

*Skill created to standardize new Python project creation using UV and to reduce manual setup steps.*
